Mamardashvili 


SOZNANIYE I TSIVILIZATSIYA

It was rather unfortunate of him to use the "the principle of the three Ks".

By this "3K Principle" he referred to three authors: Cartesius (Descartes), which is Russian is 'Картезиус', Kant, and Kafka.

Mamardashvili formulates his principle thusly:

1. Cartesius

There is a non-verbal existence to which we refer as a "self". THe world is such that this existence capable of saying "I" is plural, and it cannot be reduced to less than one. 

This is what Mamardashvili stresses here: 

this type of existence is unique because it *can*. It can say "I", at any moment, wherever it was. The whole world is held by this "can". The world would not exist without this ability, this power to be able to do something.

Quite unexpectedly for us, the stress in on potentiality, the canness of this type of existence.  

This is where the priciple 'cogito ergo sum' is embedded. 

Mamardashvili gave this principle a different form.


2. Kant

There are so-called 'transcendent intelligibles' or intelligible objects that act as conditions for an act of understanding and moral judgements of a particular being. Under these conditions it is meaninigful for a finite being to have an act of understanding. 

Truth judgements wouldn't even exist in the world without those conditions.

it makes sense to distinguish between wrong/write, good/bad, 
because there are those transcendent intelligibilities
that exist in the world as part of its ontology


3. Kafka

there are 'Zombie' situations where 
with the same signs and nominations as in K1 and K2,
none of the things said above exist

the self does not exist
the transcendent intelligibiles do not exist


---

We say something moral or immoral. 
The situation has a certain number of things that are either good or bad.
By using moral terms we presuppose the existence of certain moral objects (!). 

It is like that which makes up a situation contains those moral objects that determine the moral quality of this situation.

The problem of human consciousness is that 
we first have to enable and support a situation 
in which we can judge in a meaningful way
and use the notions of ethics and dignity
(these are the conditions of freedom)
or we decidedly refuse to support these conditions.

In other words, morality is not 
the [torzhestvo]
of morality
--when everything is great, everything is moral and correct, this is a good society, this society is [po khuzhe].

Morality is rather
about enabling and supporting a situation
where its own terms (terms of morality) can be used in a meaningful way
It needs the descriptions, accounts, reports, meditations, [products of thinking, matters of concern]
on the world
to be as full and as detailed as possible.

All you should care is accuracy, truthfulness. Reception is not your concern.

Only then proper judgements are possible. 

[This is what you might call conditions of thinking and feeling, or *conditions of sensibility* -- a concern shared by many thinkers, particularly his contemporaries Lyoatrd, Nancy.] 

This means, explains Mamardashvili, that there are certain proto-acts to those of Kant's intelligibles and Descartes' cogito

[akty vmestimosti]

acts of human situatedness [vmestimost]
[vmestimost -- capability to fit it; appropriateness; compatibility; close to 'umestniy']

when humans can situate themselves as being part of the world
and also represent this world with them in it

In this sense, for example, artist's gaze is a proto-act of the situatedness of nature as a landscape. By itself, nature is obviously absolutely neutral towards its painterly aspects. 

And when we regard nature from this point of view, 
we fail to notice that our comportment toward nature has already been preceded by the act that we should call the initial situatedness [pervovmestimost'] of nature as a landscape.

This act cannot be self-contradictory.

The same way, to quote Kant, reason cannot contradict itself.

Yet I will say the following:

The philosophical problem in consciousness and ontology is this:
no picture of anything
for instance, a description or representation of injustice
that brings up certain emotions in us
and demands our reaction,
does not contain within itself 
its own analytical self-judgements
or our reactions to this representation.

This is what Kant named as 'facts of reason' -- 
it is not reasoning about facts,
not facts kept in our mind,
but our reason itself as a fact.

This fact cannot be predicated in advance,
it cannot function as a condition;
it can only either be or not be present.

If it is present, then it is absolute [vsemesten],
and everywhere where it is recognised as such
judgement is possible.

In all our judgements -- 
this country is good, this one is bad -- 
there is a [predposylka]:
the existence of Cartesian cogito and Kantian transcendentals.

Because the very description of a situation contains nothing analytical.

---

The K3 situations are those of absurdity,
when the above mentioned notions are no longer applicable.

In fact, K3 situations can involve those notions and have the appearance of meaning, yet there no initial situatedness. The words are used, but the reality that they denote is alien to the language that is used to describe it. The concepts are displaced in terms of meaning, or, as Deleuze would put it, deterritorialised.

This is the state of a nightmare that resists any efforts at establishing meaning, and sabotages thinking and understanding.

For instance, this applies to the cases when the search for the truth is understood in the same terms as the search for a bathroom, or vice versa. This is what a Kafquesque situation means. 

This is why Kafka, instead of being tragic, is rather comical, but in a very twisted way. It is when laughter is the only way you can react to the violent absurdity.

Mamardashvili uses a metaphor of a man being reduced to an animal that cannot step outside of the nightmare.


Mamardashvili talks about the situation in Soviet Union. 
The language is full of civilisation and enligtened concepts--from antiquity to enlightenment and modernity. There is this shell of signification that has nothing to do with reality. There is no law, yet there is the language of law. There is no free thought, yet there is language of thought and all the intellectual heritage. 

Soviet people used this language to define themselves and the world around them. And, as soon as they take this language to the letter, they experience the K3 situation. 


undefined situation



 



 
